Your heart beats about 100,000 times per day. During the average person’s lifetime, their heart beats more than 2.6 billion times. (Your pulse is a way you can feel your heart beating.)
The beating sound from your heart — lub-dub, lub-dub, lub-dub — is from the clap of valve leaflets opening and closing.
A typical human heart valve is about the size of a half dollar.
Each minute, your heart pumps nearly 1.5 gallons (5.7 liters) of blood. That’s a pump flow rate that could fill an Olympic-sized swimming pool in less than a year. (Talk about a gold medal effort!)
Your adult-sized heart is about the size of two hands clasped together. A child’s heart is about the size of a single fist.
Location is everything in life, right? That’s true for your heart, too. It’s located in the front of your chest, slightly behind and to the left of your breastbone. Your ribs offer extra protection for the vital organ.
To make room for your heart, your left lung is slightly smaller than your right lung.
Your heart weighs somewhere between 7 ounces and 15 ounces (200 grams to 425 grams), or less than a pound. The average male’s heart weighs 2 ounces (57 grams) more than the average female’s heart. For comparison’s sake, a blue whale — the world’s largest animal — has a heart weighing more than 1,000 pounds. A person could easily crawl through the aorta in that sized heart.
The smallest animal heart can be found in fairyflies. You’d need a microscope to see the ticker in this tiny insect.
Your heart works as a coordinated machine. The right side of your heart pumps “used” blood from your body into your lungs, where it refills with oxygen. The left side of your heart then pumps re-oxygenated blood back into your body.
Almost every cell in your body gets blood from your heart. The outliers can be found in the corneas of your eyes.
Your heart pumps blood through about 60,000 miles (96,000 kilometers) of blood vessels. To put that in perspective, this blood tubing system could circle the Earth at the equator TWICE.
A female’s average heartbeat is faster than a male’s by almost eight beats a minute. The reason? Because their hearts are usually smaller in size, females need their hearts to beat more to pump the same amount of blood.
A typical heart pumps approximately 4 tablespoons of blood with each beat.
Your heart has its own electrical supply and will continue to beat even when separated from your body. This specialized network of cells is known as the heart’s electrical conduction system.
Heart disease is the greatest single threat to your health and the leading cause of death globally. The good news? You can help manage your heart health through dietary choices, regular exercise and stress management.
It’s true that some heart problems can be inherited. It’s also true that you can minimize their impact by managing blood pressure and cholesterol through a heart-healthy lifestyle.
Runners have a 45% lower risk of heart disease or stroke.
Cardiac health is an age-old issue, as evidence of heart disease has been found in 3,000-year-old mummies.
Research shows that Monday — the start of the traditional work week — is the most common day of the week to experience a heart attack. It’s a phenomenon known as the “Blue Monday” effect.
The holiday season is also heart attack season. More cardiac deaths occur on December 25 than any other day of the year. The second and third-deadliest days are December 26 and January 1.
A joke a day may help keep the heart doctor away, as laughing can improve heart health by lowering stress and relaxing blood vessels. Happiness can lower your risk of heart disease, too.
Why does the heart symbolize love? Probably because of the pitter-patter you feel in your chest when Cupid’s arrow strikes. (But in truth, your brain controls love — but that would make for a lousy Valentine’s Day symbol.)
Despite your heart not being part of making a love connection, it can still be broken when relationships take a bad turn. An emotionally driven condition known as “broken heart syndrome” can temporarily weaken your heart muscle.
Heart cancer is very rare because heart cells stop dividing in adulthood, making them more resistant to the sort of mutations that can lead to cancer.
Modesty prompted the invention of the stethoscope, that iconic medical tool that healthcare providers use to listen to your heart. Before it existed, doctors had to press an ear directly to the chest of their patient.
The world’s first “stopped-heart” surgery took place at Cleveland Clinic in 1956. Today, this type of surgery — which uses a machine to pump blood throughout the body while the heart is stopped during an operation — is commonplace.
A cardiac surgeon at Cleveland Clinic pioneered coronary artery bypass surgery in the late 1960s. The surgery restores blood flow to areas of the heart using blood vessels transplanted from other parts of the body.
Each year, more than 2 million people around the world have open-heart surgery to address various heart conditions.
A woman’s heart beats slightly faster than a man’s heart. On average, a woman’s heart rate is about eight beats faster than a man’s. That’s because a woman’s heart is smaller and needs to pump faster to deliver the same amount of blood to the rest of the body. Newborns, however, have the fastest heartbeats, averaging up to 190 beats per minute.
The beating sound of your heart is caused by the valves of the heart opening and closing.
It’s possible to have a broken heart. It’s called broken heart syndrome and can have similar symptoms as a heart attack. The difference is that a heart attack is from heart disease and broken heart syndrome is caused by a rush of stress hormones from an emotional or physical stress event.
Death from a broken heart, or broken heart syndrome, is possible but extremely rare.
The iconic heart shape as a symbol of love is traditionally thought to come from the silphium plant, which was used as an ancient form of birth control.
If you were to stretch out your blood vessel system, it would extend over 60,000 miles.
Heart cells stop dividing, which means heart cancer is extremely rare.
Laughing is good for your heart. It reduces stress and gives a boost to your immune system.
The first open-heart surgery occurred in 1893. It was performed by Daniel Hale Williams, who was one of the few black cardiologists in the United States at the time.
The first implantable pacemaker was used in 1958. Arne Larsson, who received the pacemaker, lived longer than the surgeon who implanted it. Larsson died at 86 of a disease that was unrelated to his heart.
The youngest person to receive heart surgery was only a minute old. She had a heart defect that many babies don’t survive. Her surgery was successful, but she’ll eventually need a heart transplant.
The earliest known case of heart disease was identified in the remains of a 3,500-year-old Egyptian mummy.
The fairy fly, which is a kind of wasp, has the smallest heart of any living creature.
The American pygmy shrew is the smallest mammal, but it has the fastest heartbeat at 1,200 beats per minute.
Whales have the largest heart of any mammal. It is 5 feet long and weighs 400 pounds.
The giraffe has a lopsided heart, with their left ventricle being thicker than the right. This is because the left side has to get blood up the giraffe’s long neck to reach their brain.
Heart attacks occur more often on Monday than on any other day of the week, possibly due to the body’s circadian rhythm. They’re also common in the morning because stress hormones are at their highest levels.
Christmas day is the most common day of the year for heart attacks to happen.
The human heart weighs less than 1 pound. However, a man’s heart, on average, is 2 ounces heavier than a woman’s heart.
The average heart is the size of a fist in an adult.
Your heart will beat about 115,000 times each day.
Your heart pumps about 2,000 gallons of blood every day.
An electrical system controls the rhythm of your heart. It’s called the cardiac conduction system.
The heart can continue beating even when it’s disconnected from the body.
On average, it takes about 45 seconds for blood to circulate from the heart, all around the body.
In 1903, physiologist Willem Einthoven (1860-1927) invented the electrocardiograph, which measures the electric current which flows through the heart.